This directory contains Doom][ example PWAD's, which show features added to
XDoom, which weren't implemented in id's original Doom. To play this PWAD's
you need the Doom][ IWAD, they'll not work with Doom or shareware Doom IWAD.

For your convenience the maps have no monsters in skill 1/2, so that one
can mess with the features undisturbed. Higher skill settings add some
monsters to test, how they react to the environment.

Most examples have support for the UAC communication gadget. If you see
a disk icon in the top left of the screen, press F5 to activate the
device. The bug in dmcotst is intentional to test the PWAD debugging
for the thingie.

This PWAD's can be rebuild from their sources (which are all included) with
the tools in ftp://ftp.cdrom.com/pub/doom/source/xwadtools*.

boomtst		- XDoom has various features implemented from Boom. This is
		  a test level to try out this features and make sure they
		  are Boom compatible. So this level can be played with XDoom
		  and Boom. All features used in the level map are supported
		  in the WAD editor tkwadcad.

dmcotst		- XDoom can spawn different things into a level, dependent on
		  the game mode: single player, deathmatch and cooperative.
		  This is a simple level just with one room and various things,
		  which will be different for every game mode. The level has
		  four player starts and four deathmatch starts. The used bits
		  are compatible to Boom, so this should work with Boom engines
		  too. WAD editors which support the new thing flags are Yadex
		  and Tkwadcad.

lasdemo		- XDoom got force fields (laser barriers). They can be opened
		  with a switch or be used as obstacles. It is not a good idea
		  to run into this lasers, I put 1GW lasers into XDoom (no
		  energy problem in a virtual world) and they will fry your
		  butt. The monsters are smart enough to avoid laser beams,
		  so don't wait for them to run into lasers. If a barrier is
		  opened with a switch it will close after a while, if some
		  stuff is in it's surrounding sectors, it will not close
		  (and cut you into two halves).
		  Also note that the lasers have an effect on the surrounding
		  light level, if switched on and off.
		  Oh, a little secret is that one also can damage the lenses
		  of some laser with a gunshot. Try shooting the silver stopper
		  textures for the red laser beam, if you hit it right the
		  lenses are damaged, the laser goes off and never on again.
		  The Kamikaze Doom Warrior can try to punch the laser out
		  too, yes, is possible if you are careful.
		  This is up to the WAD author, as an example you cannot damage
		  the lenses for the green force fields.
		  Right now this lasers only work in XDoom. The WAD editor
		  tkwadcad supports PWAD's with force fields.

plustst		- Test level for XDoomPlus. This is a map in extended Hexen
		  format for testing the engine. Also used for testing
		  compatibility with ZDoom.

sldoor		- I have finished and improved the code for horizontally
		  sliding doors, as it was planned by id for Doom][. This
		  example shows how to use sliding doors in PWAD's. The
		  graphic art work was done by Andre Majorel and he supported
		  me with ideas too. Right now also this will work only in
		  XDoom, but the code can be implemented in other Doom engines
		  too, it was partially done in the sources id released, and
		  commented out. The WAD editor tkwadcad supports PWAD's with
		  horizontally sliding doors.

tfe		- Demonstration of the TFE bug. Can be used to test if XDoom
		  was compiled with bug fixes or without.

trandemo	- For the force fields I had implemented translucent wall
		  textures, because the energy fields just look better if
		  they are translucent. This feature also can be used to
		  make realistic looking windows with glass in them and
		  this demo shows some of this feature. Will only work
		  with XDoom and the WAD editor tkwadcad supports translucent
		  wall textures.
